Stp documentation (#72)
bisdn/bisdn.github.io: network_configuration/stp.md

**WARNING**: BISDN Linux currently supports standard STP (IEEE Standard 802.1d) and RSTP (IEEE Standard 802.1w). In most modern network topologies RSTP is used because it provides significantly faster recovery in case of topology changes. To configure RSTP you *have* to use the packaged [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd) instead of the default STP implementation in the Linux kernel.
{: .label .label-yellow }

## STP Configuration Instructions

The STP configuration examples below assume the following topology. Throughout all examples given here, only the switch configuration side is shown.

![Topology](/assets/img/stp-topology.png)

An STP-enabled bridge can be created using iproute2 with the following command:

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1 stp_state 1
```

or by copying following systemd-networkd configuration files into the /etc/systemd/networkd directory and restarting the `systemd-networkd` systemd-service.
```
10-swbridge.netdev:

[NetDev]
Name=swbridge
Kind=bridge

[Bridge]
VLANFiltering=1
STP=1
```

```
10-swbridge.network:

[Match]
Name=swbridge
```

> The necessary commands for configuring and attaching the ports to the bridge are documented here: [VLAN Bridging](https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer: why do we need the absolute link path here? we are using internal links throughout all the docs, so i why not here?

Author: It was not consistently used. How do I link internally if I want to go up one directory? i.e. ../getting_started/something.md

Author: Although here we can just point to the file in the same relative directory, network_configuration

Author: fixed

 designated bridge      8000.62e79c6a4489       message age timer          0.00
 designated port        8002                    forward delay timer        0.00
 designated cost           0                    hold timer                 0.00
 flags

```

# Rapid Spanning Tree (RSTP)

## Introduction 

Meant as an improvement to the original STP standard, RSTP improves Spanning Tree convergence after network topology changes. If the switch is configured for RSTP and receives a STP (802.1d) BPDU, then STP functionality is assumed.

There is currently no RSTP support in the Linux Kernel and therefore BISDN Linux uses [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd) to configure and manage RSTP.

mstpd is managed by systemd and is disabled by default. For documentation on how to manage systemd services please refer to [systemd getting started](/getting_started/configure_baseboxd.md#getting-started).

## RSTP configuration

When `mstpd` is enabled, any configured bridge will have STP enabled by default. Therefore, it is not required to specify the `stp_state` flag when creating a bridge:

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer: why do we need the absolute link path here? we are using internal links throughout all the docs, so i why not here?

Author: Changed link type

---
title: Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)
parent: Network Configuration
---

# Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)

## Introduction

> The Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) is a protocol meant to build loop-less topologies in Layer 2 networks. It works by distributively creating network paths without loops that could be harmful in case of e.g. flooding broadcast messages, by disabling (blocking) ports in the configured bridges. This document shows how to configure and test the STP implementation available in Linux.

Author: fixed

> **WARNING**: BISDN Linux currently supports standard STP (IEEE Standard 802.1d) and RSTP (IEEE Standard 802.1w). For current network topologies, RSTP is the protocol more commonly used. For RSTP you *have* to use the packaged [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd).

Author: Better wording, added.

{: .label .label-yellow }

## STP Configuration Instructions

> For configuring STP we assume the following configuration. In this document only the switch configuration is shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The STP configuration examples below assume the following topology. Throughout all examples given here, only the switch configuration side is shown.
```

Author: sounds better.

![Topology](/assets/img/stp-topology.png)

An STP-enabled bridge can be created using iproute2 with the following command:

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1 stp_state 1
```

or by copying following systemd-networkd configuration files into the /etc/systemd/networkd directory and restarting the `systemd-networkd` systemd-service.
```
10-swbridge.netdev:

[NetDev]
Name=swbridge
Kind=bridge

[Bridge]
VLANFiltering=1
STP=1
```

```
10-swbridge.network:

[Match]
Name=swbridge
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The necessary commands for configuring and attaching the ports to the bridge are documented here: [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).
```

Author: Also flows much better. Added.

 designated root        8000.62e79c6a4489       path cost                  2
 designated bridge      8000.62e79c6a4489       message age timer          0.00
 designated port        8001                    forward delay timer        0.00
 designated cost           0                    hold timer                 0.00
 flags

port8 (2)
 port id                8002                    state                  blocking
 designated root        8000.62e79c6a4489       path cost                  2
 designated bridge      8000.62e79c6a4489       message age timer          0.00
 designated port        8002                    forward delay timer        0.00
 designated cost           0                    hold timer                 0.00
 flags

```

# Rapid Spanning Tree (RSTP)

## Introduction 

Meant as an improvement to the original STP standard, RSTP improves Spanning Tree convergence after network topology changes. If the switch is configured for RSTP and receives a STP (802.1d) BPDU, then STP functionality is assumed.

There is currently no RSTP support in the Linux Kernel and therefore BISDN Linux uses [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd) to configure and manage RSTP.

> mstpd is managed by systemd and is disabled by default. For documentation on how to manage the service refer to [systemd getting started](https://docs.bisdn.de/getting_started/configure_baseboxd.html#getting-started).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mstpd is managed by systemd and is disabled by default. For documentation on how to manage systemd services please refer to [systemd getting started](https://docs.bisdn.de/getting_started/configure_baseboxd.html#getting-started).
```

Author: fixed

## RSTP configuration

When `mstpd` is enabled, any configured bridge will have STP enabled by default. Therefore, it is not required to specify the `stp_state` flag when creating a bridge:

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The necessary commands for configuring and attaching the ports to the bridge are documented here:  [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).
```

## RSTP operation

> After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed over the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows an example command output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the bridge and its ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed with the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows an example command output.
```

Author: good catch. fixed

ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1 stp_state 1
```

or by copying following systemd-networkd configuration files into the /etc/systemd/networkd directory and restarting the `systemd-networkd` systemd-service.
```
10-swbridge.netdev:

[NetDev]
Name=swbridge
Kind=bridge

[Bridge]
VLANFiltering=1
STP=1
```

```
10-swbridge.network:

[Match]
Name=swbridge
```

> The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).
```
(the original link did not work for me here and in the other links in this page)

Author: fixed. Refering relatively is fine when it's done right, which it is not here. Here we would have to remove the network_configuration directory, as we are already in it. Absolute path is clear.

After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed over the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows an example command output.

> **WARNING**: The `brctl` tool does not work with bridges managed by `mstpd`. For a bridge control tool use `mstpctl` instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**WARNING**: The `brctl` tool does not work with bridges managed by `mstpd`. Use `mstpctl` instead.
```
